A second test for Indian federation is the language policy. Our Constitution did not give the status of national language to any one language. Hindi was identified as the official language. But Hindi is the mother tongue of only about 40 per cent of Indians. Therefore, there were many safe guards to protect other languages. Besides Hindi, there are 21 other languages recognised as Scheduled Languages by the Constitution. A candidate in an examination conducted for the Central Government positions may opt to take the examination in any of these languages. States too have their own official languages. Much of the government work takes place in the official language of the concerned State. Unlike Sri Lanka, the leaders of our country adopted a very cautious attitude in spreading the use of Hindi. According to the Constitution, the use of English for official purposes was to stop in1965. However, many non-Hindi speaking States demanded that the use of English continue. In Tamil Nadu, this movement took a violentform. The Central Governmentresponded by agreeing to continue
the use of English along with Hindifor official purposes. Many criticsthink that this solution favoured theEnglish-speaking elite. Promotionof Hindi continues to be the officialpolicy of the Government of India.Promotion does not mean that theCentral Government can imposeHindi on States where people speaka different language. The flexibilityshown by Indian political leadershelped our country avoid the kind ofsituation that Sri Lanka finds itself in.